# [My story - going from morbid obesity to half the man I once was.](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1XRA5K0ZPnYbEc5mn3FrzgPYJACGZnq20HLQ3yoRu1so/pub)

Dear Reader;

The odds are stacked against you. Whether you want to lose weight, quit smoking, or accomplish something huge in your life, the statisticians have already run the numbers and delivered the verdict: most people who set out on these quests fail miserably.

That’s definitely where I was. I have literally started hundreds of diets, and failed every single time. I’ve read countless books which promised to help me easily shed pounds. I have tried nearly every fat burning miracle pill, used every kitchen gadget, and got into every fad out there. Some of them lasted a few weeks. I may have managed to last a month a time or two. But more often than not, I would start a program, and within days I would fail, if not sooner. I couldn’t recall the number of times I went to bed saying “tomorrow’s going to be the day,” and by the fourth bowl of cereal that morning, I knew it was all over before it ever really started.

So what changed? What did I find in my life that allowed me to defy the odds? How was I able to not only face this challenge, but to come out victorious? I tried to sum the answer up in this document, and I hope that it might help you find the strength to reach your goals and defy the odds, whether you’re losing weight, quitting a habit, or starting anew with some other seemingly insurmountable challenge. I have no super powers. I’m not a celebrity. I was never in good shape prior to this point in my life. I am an ordinary person. But that’s what is so cool about my story, and what will be so cool about yours. By overcoming these obstacles, we are living breathing proof that ordinary people can do extraordinary things. Hold onto that thought, and read on.

Caveat 1 - My story isn’t going to look like your story. We are all different, and what works well for one person might not work well for the next person. As you’re reading my story, keep that in mind. If you try to follow in my footsteps, be prepared to research and track what you’re doing as you go. If you can find something that works better for you, DO IT! You might not exercise exactly as I did. You might not eat the exact foods I did. That’s fine. The core concepts can remain the same, even if some of the mechanics vary slightly from person to person.

Caveat 2 - My trainer Brandon reminds me all the time that pushing yourself is great, but breaking yourself isn’t. The same goes for you. Find your limits, and push them, but be mindful of your body’s ability. And of course, any time you start a new health or fitness plan, you should be consulting experts. I’ve talked to doctors, trainers, nutritionists, and other experts on losing massive amounts of weight. So should you. Don’t go off on a journey without having people with you along the way who will steer you in safe, sustainable directions.

Okay, now with that behind us, let’s dive right into this thing! Before I talk about how I got where I am today, I want to give you an idea of where I was last year, I was 32, the father of a 4-year-old, and I weighed about 500 pounds. I had high blood pressure and cholesterol, anxiety, depression, sleep apnea, and daily physical pain as well. When I woke up in the morning and my feet would hit the floor, it could be several minutes before the sharp, stabbing and burning pain went away. Just walking from my bed to the nearby bathroom was enough to get me worked into a sweat. In addition to everything else I've already mentioned, I was also having these weird episodes where my heart would flutter or skip irregularly. I was definitely in denial, and I wrote off a lot of these episodes as stress or "panic attacks". The truth was that I was a wreck.

Last year shortly after Thanksgiving, I stepped on a scale for the first time in months. It blew my mind. The scale told me that fully clothed in my winter wear, I was over 500 pounds. I weighed a quarter ton. (Note: without all the layers of clothes, I weighed in around 485. This was my official “start weight” that I refer to on my Facebook page, but after this weigh-in, I spent three weeks planning, during which I ate like I always had during the holidays, and packed on several more pounds. I didn’t do an official weigh-in again prior to the 7th of January, but suffice it to say, I made it to a quarter ton during that planning phase, and probably a little more.)

This was the wake-up call I needed. A few years prior, my doctor said I’d be lucky if I made it another decade the way I was going. As i pondered that, I thought of my then 4-year-old son. I was given that prognosis (which my over-inflated sense of denial kept me from believing) when my son was about 1. Would I live to see him graduate high school? Would I live to see him turn 10? As a kid, my grandpa was almost like a second dad to me. To this day, I still maintain that most of the things I have a passion for are because he instilled those passions within me. Even my decision to buy my current car - a 1963 Studebaker Lark - came from a passion he gave me for that particular make of car. When I was approximately 9, my grandpa, who was also a chain smoker, died of lung cancer. I loved my grandpa dearly, and never could hold anything against him, except for that. To this day it is upsetting to me that he let his bad habit rob me of valuable time I desperately wanted to spend with him as a child. And as I thought of that, I realized that i was doing exactly the same thing to my son. Food was my catalyst, but the end result would be the same: a sad confused little kid in a funeral home. And despite all the excuses I ever made, the bottom line was that it was my own doing. That was a dark, ugly truth I've been denying but I had to face.

It took me almost a month, but I put together the plan that I've been on since January 1 of this year. It was a radical shift from my old thinking, and it allowed me to take control and change my life. I know at this point, many of you are hoping that I’ll jump right into the nuts and bolts: what did I eat? What exercize did I do? Trust me, I’ll get there, but truly, that stuff is useless to you if you don’t start this thing with the right mindset. Do you know why most people fail when they try to do big things? It’s because they latch on to the mechanics of the process and completely lose sight of what’s really important - the drive to make the process work. So humor me for a few minutes while I lay out what you need to know before you set out on this path.

First, I want to lay out the foundation for all of this; literally the glue that has kept this together since day one. Regardless of what you decide to do for your eating plan, or what you decide to do for your exercise plan, the most important thing is for you to have hope. Truly, it’s that simple. You need to realize that you CAN do this. You have to have hope, and believe in your ability to change. If there's anyone who could possibly doubt that ability, it would be me. Before this year started I had literally tried hundreds of diets. Every single time I tried, I would fail. But as I did my research to start this journey I realize something very important-there are a lot of ordinary people out there who done extraordinary things. Through nothing more than eating right and working hard, I can point to story after story after story of people who were in the same position that you and I started from, and they all came out victorious. This was exciting for me, because I think on every diet I ever tried, somewhere deep down inside I didn't truly believe that I could do it. Eventually those cracks in my resolve would grow wider and wider, and ultimately I would fail. So before you worry about a single thing regarding nutrition, and before you worry about what you have to do at the gym, you need to tell yourself that you can do this. You can and you will. As I’ve already said, ordinary people can do extraordinary things.

If holding on to hope and the belief you can do this is the most important piece of success, the second most important piece is to be willing to stop at nothing to get it. Some days this journey is easy; other days it's extremely difficult. There were days, especially early on, where I would come home miserable. My ankles would hurt from walking on a treadmill with 500 pounds bearing down on them. My back would hurt from being hunched over on the treadmills because I had to hold the handrails just so my feet would keep moving. One day fairly early on in my journey I really pushed myself to walk 5 miles. It took almost 3 hours by the end, and the result was some of the nastiest blood blisters on my feet that I've ever had in my life. (In retrospect, I probably should've waited a little longer before I tried doing a 5 mile walk. It's not a big deal now, and in fact many days I'll do 5 miles or more when I run.) My point is that despite the pain and despite the feelings I had sometimes that I would never ever lose the weight, I kept pressing on. You've probably seen the phrase "never never never give up" over and over on my page. To me, that phrase (which is actually a paraphrase from a speech Winston Churchill delivered regarding how the comparatively underpowered Great Britain would defeat Germany in World War II) very effectively sums up what you have to do to be successful on this journey.

If you haven't picked up on my subtle wording yet, you may notice that I tend to avoid the word "diet." As I was preparing for this journey, I took a good hard look at all of the diets that I'd failed past. One thing I came back with was that part of the problem was and how I viewed losing weight. When you go on a diet, you look at it as a sort of temporary program that eventually you plan on getting off of. The more I thought about that the more wrong dieting looked. As I researched other people who lost large amounts of weight, something I saw over and over and over in their success stories was that instead of thinking of this as a diet, they think of what they're doing as a complete life change; a "journey" if you will. I realized that I had to make this shift in my thinking as well. Instead of starting some special program that I'll eventually get off, I decided to approach this as a new way of living, something that I would continue to live for the rest of my life. That doesn't mean I'll never eat sugar again. It doesn't mean I'll never enjoy the foods that I once indulged in. It does mean that those things are not a daily part of my life, and when they do come into my life, it will be in a much healthier fashion. Truth be told, the farther I get away from having those things regularly, the less I miss them. In fact, I'm getting to a stage where I really love what I eat now and when I reward myself with some of the foods I use to indulge in, it's almost hard to tolerate how excessively sugary or over flavored they are. Truly, by thinking of this is a journey instead of a temporary diet, you'll set yourself up for greater chance of success.

If you haven't read the post I uploaded about taking small steps, you should go read it. I'm a firm believer that you have to dive in and start this thing strong. I'll explain how I started in a moment, and believe me, it was pretty radical. However, once I got set up in my journey, everything was done in small increments. If you look through my past posts you'll see that I use index cards (I literally numbered them 1 all the way through 255, one for each pound I wanted to lose) to break my big goal into a bunch of very small goals. Because each goal is a micro goal just to get to the next pound lost, it's easier to have victory than if I'm trying to wait to lose 25 or 50 pounds before I celebrate somethinng. That said, I also have special victory cards at places such as 25 pounds lost and 50 pounds lost etc., where I reward myself for reaching those medium-sized goals. This is important, because I don't do cheat days. A lot of diets allow them, but I think they’re an awful idea. Cheat days aren't earned, and if you do something that's not earned, you are basically practicing quitting your journey. We don’t endorse cheating on our spouses or our taxes in our society, so why do we insist on cheating on ourselves? So instead of cheat days, when I reached these medium goals, I give myself a reward. Maybe I go out and get a big greasy burger with an order of fries, or maybe I have lunch at my favorite restaurant with my favorite pie for dessert, or maybe my reward isn't food but instead money to spend on clothes that actually fit me after I've lost so much weight. I take these reward days very seriously because they give me motivation to push on.

Another important aspect of this journey is personal responsibility. All my life, I had excuses to remain fat. Blaming genetics was a really good one for me. My entire family was heavyset. Clearly, I had “the fat gene.” And it looked like it: Even as a child I had been overweight. It was surely just the misfortune of being a “big boned” guy who came from a family with a genetic disposition towards enormity, and I should just learn to live with the weight. And if that wasn’t the excuse du jour, I had a truckload of others I could go to. Here’s a great pointer: If you ever hear yourself using a sentence that starts with some variation of “I can’t lose weight because,” then you’re making an excuse. In my research before starting this journey, I found stories of all sorts of people with great excuses to fail. I read about retirees who could have said it’s hard to lose weight when your metabolism has slowed from age that got fit. (In fact, a former mentor of mine who is in his 70’s recently lost nearly 100 pounds in six months!) Women who could argue that “women can’t lose weight as easily as guys” and yet had losses that were very nearly on par with the amount of weight I’ve lost. I even read about a woman who was paralyzed in a wheelchair, and managed to lose tons of weight and get into shape. Certainly, there are some situations where getting in shape just isn’t possible, but by large, most of us are far more capable than we let ourselves think we are. Kill your sacred cows preventing you from success, and don’t let excuses stop you.

There's one more really important thing I want to talk about before I get into the actual physical aspects of what I did. Before I even stepped out in this journey on day one I realized that I needed accountability. For whatever reason, I was always ashamed of trying to lose weight. I had to combat this head-on and realize that by being open and honest about my journey I would have a much greater chance of success. When I look over the hundreds of failed diets I had tried, virtually every single one of them had little or no accountability, and I gave them little or no publicity. The one single time in my life before this where I managed to stick to a diet for more than a month and actually lose a decent amount of weight was a time in my early 20s where I had a very supportive boss who more or less forced me to be publicly accountable. He would brag on me, ask how I was doing, tell others what a great job I was doing, and because he was hanging all of this out in the open I was actually doing a lot better than I ever had before. Unfortunately, he took a job out of state and then I found a different job shortly thereafter, and almost immediately after, that diet went from being public to private. It soon collapsed like every other one had. So when I set out on this journey I decided I had to scream this from the rooftops. I told friends, I told family, I started sharing on my personal Facebook page until about a month in when support from friends and family grew so much that I set up the Facebook page that you found me through. (In all honesty, I never expected anyone other than my friends and family to have noticed, but now I'm really happy that all of you have. It gives me so much joy to share what I've done with others in hopes that you can do it as well, and you can.) I'm not saying that you have to create a Facebook page for your weight loss or that you have to post daily updates, but what I would suggest is that at the very least you find people around you who you can talk with about this openly as you go on this journey. You need people who will come up to you on the days you don’t want to go to the gym, who will tell you to get over yourself and just go to the gym. Having said all that, when I started this Facebook page I knew I would be standing up in the middle of the town square, and knowing that my success or failure would take place publicly has been a huge motivation to keep pushing on towards success.

If you've made it this far through the novel I've composed here, congratulations! I know this has been wordy so far. But stick with me a little longer, I'm going to start talking about how I began my journey next.

As I said earlier, when I started this journey I took a big leap. I had to address a lot of personal demons. I had to stop blaming other people, other situations, family genetics, and all of the other excuses I've made over my life, and I had to look in the mirror and I had to say "Jim, you did this to yourself." That's a tough thing to admit, but it really is the truth. It occurred to me that one of my biggest problems was an addiction to eating and using food as a coping mechanism. I would find something all day to go crunching or munching on, and any time I found myself in a situation that was full of emotion, good or bad, eating seemed to be the way I dealt with that overload. I knew this was an addiction I had to break. I knew that instead of eating, I had to learn how to address issues head-on.

Because of this struggle, my first step was probably the most radical thing I've ever done in my life. For the first two weeks of this year I went on a liquid only fast. The goal of this fast was not to lose weight. In fact, aside from soda (which I decided was the first thing I would get rid of on January 1), if it would go through a straw, I could have it. I LOVE shakes from the drive-in. I may have went there close to every night of those two weeks. I did lose several pounds in this time, but it was mostly because it’s hard to get the thousands upon thousands of calories I was taking in daily through beverages. I was still getting plenty of calories, and like I said, it wasn’t even all about losing weight. The true goal of this fast was twofold. First, I needed to get my head in the game and put my focus on God back where it belonged. (Now, if you're not a believer in a higher power, it could still be useful to take this time to work on getting emotionally centered.) Second, I needed to break my addiction to eating food. When I knew for a fact that for the next two weeks I wouldn't be putting a burger in my mouth or chips in my mouth or anything other than liquid it forced me to find new ways to deal with tough situations. Now, I don't necessarily think that everyone has to start a journey the way I did, but to me it was highly symbolic of the fact that I was completely changing my life and that this was a completely new start for me.

There's an awful lot of really good science out there about setting and breaking habits. Most experts agree that it takes about 21 days to set or remove the habit from your daily routine. When I started planning this fast, I considered going three weeks. The reason I settled on two weeks instead truly mostly came down to the fact that my birthday is January 15, and I really wanted to have cake. (Cake is one of my ultimate weaknesses by the way. It vexes me to this day.) It might sound a little shallow, but it's the honest truth. I was a little worried that after the two weeks I would struggle and resort back to habitual eating and using food as a coping mechanism. At the end of the two weeks however, I discovered that I had much more self-control and willpower than ever before. The urges and cravings to go to food were definitely still there, but instead of almost mindlessly reaching for food, I now had the ability to will myself not to.

After the 14 day fast and my birthday on the 15th (where I ate mostly well aside from that amazing cake), I started out on the eating plan that I'm following to this very day. (Though as my knowledge of nutrition has evolved and developed, I have been able to add more and more to what I monitor.) I decided on a low-carb, protein style diet. I went this route for a few reasons. First, I really enjoy protein-based foods. Steak, chicken, bacon, and all the rest are wonderful things. Second, as I researched how our bodies handle different types of calories I learned that carbohydrates convert to fat much more easily than proteins and even fats do. Our bodies need to spend several times more energy to convert protein to fat than they do to complete the same process for carbohydrates. Third, it's ridiculously easy to overeat carbohydrates and ridiculously hard to overeat protein. One of my favorite things to eat back in my quarter-ton days were “Krispy Kreme” donuts. I could buy a dozen in the drive-through and have them finished by the time I got home. Recently I looked up how many calories were in those donuts that I had been eating. Calorically speaking, that one dozen donuts that I could finish in 10 minutes was about the equivalent of four whole roasted chickens. When that box of donuts was done, I could be hungry again in 10 minutes. I don't know if I've ever had four whole chickens in my life in a single day, and I don't think I could if I tried. My fourth reason for going with the low-carb approach was simply because it was the approach I used in that one temporarily successful diet I had tried in my 20s which I mentioned above.

When I started out, the only thing I counted was how many carbs I ate in a day. I set a daily maximum of 30 g of carbohydrates. So long as I kept under my 30 g a day, I could have whatever I wanted without worrying about calories or anything else. I would have steak, pork chops, eggs and bacon, whatever. Most of the time, my 30 g of carbohydrates were spent on the sauces that I would put on my meat. As time went on I learned more about nutrition and that refined some of the choices I make. Today, I can even allow myself to have more than 30 carbs a day so long as the carbs I'm choosing are "healthy carbs"-things that can give my body energy for working out harder or help clear fat out faster. But still, they come in sparingly, and what I’m doing now still looks a lot like what I started out doing. I’m certainly not eating piles of pasta or donuts anymore!

According to my doctor and several other professionals, when you eat is important, maybe as important as what you eat. Most Americans have small breakfasts, medium lunches, and then enjoy big dinners. That’s a trend that should really be reversed. From early on, I took this advice on, and my breakfast has been my largest meal of my day - at least half my daily caloric intake. Lunch is medium-sized, and dinner is small, if anything. (My doctor told me I was free to skip dinner if I wasn’t hungry.) And it’s very rare that I eat late in the evening.

So, what does my eating look like? When I started, here’s what one day looked like:

Breakfast:

- Steak with steak sauce
- Scrambled eggs
- Two servings of peanut butter

Lunch:

- Two chicken breasts with barbeque sauce
- One serving of peanut butter (I love peanut butter, if you didn’t guess)

Dinner:

- Can of tuna, mixed with mayo

You’ll notice I didn’t include what I drink in that menu. That’s because I no longer drink my calories. That means no soda, no sugary drinks, no juices, no adult beverages. Drinks are some of the absolute worst calories you can get. They do almost nothing to fill you up, and they’re super concentrated, so you get piles of calories. Today, I stick to water, occasional teas, and if I really truly want some flavor, I use those light drink mixes that have no calories. (I use those sparingly, as the artificial sweeteners aren’t the healthies things out there.)

As far as exercise goes, it took me about a week after the fast ended before I cast a shadow on the door of my gym. On day one, I had a very simple goal: I wanted to walk 1 mile, at any speed, but I had to do 1 mile. Before I talk about how far it actually made it, I want to talk about some rules I gave myself for the gym. My first rule is to push myself as hard as I can go, and when I think I've reached my limit I try to go just a little further. My second rule (which didn't really take effect until the second time I went to the gym) is that each time I go to the gym, I try to find a way to improve upon what I've done in the past. That can be anything from going slightly faster on the treadmill, to starting on a new machine, to just being at the gym a few minutes more than usual. I also set a silly (and a little gross) rule that I call" the bellybutton rule." This one comes from the fact that I hate sweat, which is really ironic when you think about it because I let myself get to a place where I sweat all the time. Simply put, the bellybutton rule was my attempt to set a standard candle for how much effort I was putting into my workouts. I decided that if the sweat stain on my shirt reached all the way down to my bellybutton, I would know that the effort I put forth at the gym that day was roughly equal to any other day where I got my sweat stain to that same place. As ridiculous as it sounds, that silly rule has actually held true for this entire year. I still push myself that hard, and I feel like my workout is similar in terms of effect despite the fact that I do much more work now. The other two rules have also held true; i still follow them to this day.

So with those rules in place, there I was the gym on day one on the treadmills with the expectation that I walk at least 1 mile. I couldn't go very fast at all-I don't know if I went faster than 2 mph honestly. But I walked 1 mile, gripping the handrails for all they were worth and dealing with boatloads of pain over walking further than I had a long long time. When I got to 1 mile rule one kicked in, and I decided to keep pushing myself. I pushed and I pushed and I pushed, and finally at about 1.9 miles I could barely take it anymore so I hit the cooldown button, and finished out at just over 2 miles exactly. It took me an hour, but I doubled my initial expectations. I was sore, I was a sweaty mess, but I felt fantastic. I just did something that I hadn't done in years. This is pretty much what my workouts looked like in the beginning. About three days a week I would go to the gym, spend an hour walking, and go home tired but proud. I was super self-conscious at the beginning, so I went to my gym late night, usually between 1 and 3 AM. Somewhere along the lines I realized that I had no reason to be self-conscious; I was doing something that a lot of people in my shoes weren't willing to do and I should be proud of that. Eventually I transitioned to going during daytime hours when I wasn't sacrificing most of my sleep, but I will admit sometimes I will still go at night for old time’s sake. (Okay, usually just because the day was busy).

When I go, I try to make sure I have a couple hours to hit the gym, and have done so since day one. This is tough, especially with my job, which is very time consuming. It means making sacrifices. Sometimes it means I can’t go at a consistent time, or I have to go at some odd hour. Sometimes it even cuts into family time. That one is especially tough, but I have to tell myself to see the bigger picture. When i started this journey, I was told I might not reach my mid-40s. Recently I did a life expectancy test, and the results were astounding: my new projected median life is about 90. A couple hours a day have literally doubled my life expectancy, and the time I have with my family will now go on for years more. In the moment it’s not easy, but I have to look at the long term payoff and know that it’s worth it.

That’s where this journey started. Through the months that have passed, I’ve learned more about nutrition and fitness, and I’ve slowly built upon this base, but this is what it took for me to get started. Someday I hope to write a full book about this journey, and when I do, it will certainly lay everything out in more detail. But I wanted to get this out there so everyone could see what it takes, and decide whether they want to set out on this journey to a changed life.

I talked about all of the problems I had healthwise at the beginning. Today my doctor says I am one of his healthiest patients, and perhaps his healthiest patient. At my first appointment prior to starting this journey my doctor refused to run tests for diabetes because he was convinced they would come back positive, and once you get that label it's tough to remove. By six months into this thing my blood pressure was normal, my cholesterol was almost normal, my depression and anxiety were gone, and when the doctor ran those blood tests everything came out great. Just a matter of weeks ago I started a trial run of going without my CPAP machine. Things have been going well, and it looks like sleep apnea is something else that is now part of my past and not my future. I went from being a 500 pound man to man weighing nearly half that in 12 months, and I fully believe you can do the same thing. If you set out on this journey, let me know. I want to hear how it’s going for you, to cheer you on, and if need be, give you a nudge to keep going and never never never give up. It isn’t always easy, but it’s always been worth it, and despite the struggles, this truly has been the best year of my life. Make this upcoming year the best year of your life. Hold onto hope, make sacrifices, dive in, and of course,

NEVER NEVER NEVER GIVE UP!

Sincerely believing in you,

Jim Clements

[Jim Gettin’ Slim](https://www.facebook.com/jimgettinslim)

"Let us strip off every weight that slows us down, especially the sin that so easily trips us up. And let us run with endurance the race God has set before us" -Heb. 12:1
